# Outline
This repository is structured with three folders: "raw data", "python scripts", and "visuals". "Raw data" contains the raw scripts and metadata used to create the social networks. 

"Python scripts" contains two scripts used to generate social networks. "Final graphs" creates one graph for each film representing its social network, and "Graph frames" generates a graph for every scene, slowly growing over time. 

"Visuals" contains several sets of graphs, defined in the folder with a README and with color keys represented as README files in each subfolder. "Gifs" contains the gif representation of the network growing for each film, and the other folders are images showing the final graph using different encodings.


# Brief essay
To help identify and analyze the themes, tropes, and structure of horror, I created a set of graphs representing the social networks of various films  and used network analysis to help clarify the role of the female gothic in social structure and identify the relationship between theatricality and role-playing in the horror genre.
First, I determined the betweenness centrality for each node in each network, showing a correlation between the betweenness centrality of a character or relationship and the theme of gothic isolation, particularly in *Halloween*. Betweenness centrality refers to the number of times a given node or edge appears in the set of shortest paths between all nodes in a graph.  In a social network, betweenness centrality is a measure of the connectivity of a certain character: how well a character connects other characters together. While main characters and main pairings dominated the betweenness of the networks, in *Halloween* Loomis acts as the strongest conduit between other characters. Despite Laurie’s role in the film, Loomis is more well connected, isolating Laurie from the rescuer. The edge with the highest degree centrality in *Halloween* is between Laurie and Tommy, showing Laurie’s isolation in a domestic space with the child as the Shape stalks them—a traditional element of the female gothic (Schantz 2-11). The social network of Halloween signifies Laurie’s entrapment with Tommy and away from the strongest connector, showing how gothic isolation influences the social structure of the narrative. 
Labelling each node by role shows ways in which different sets of characters separate and interact with each other. The labels of “perpetrator,” “victim,” and “rescuer” align closely with labels of theatricality: director, actor, and audience (Schantz, 1-23). In *The Shining* and *Get Out*, the rescuers are less strongly-connected components relative to the rest of the network. In *Halloween* and *It Follows*, however, the roles of the rescuers are different: in Halloween, Loomis, a rescuer, has the highest betweenness centrality and is well-connected, while the rescuers in *It Follows*—Jay’s friends—are very strongly connected to Jay and Greg. As a result, the distinction between “audience” and “actors” as separate networks is muddled, suggesting a broad definition of the role of the “audience” or “rescuer” and their relationship to the rest of the social network. In all the networks, the perpetrators—“directors”—are strongly connected components, that is, they are connected to nearly all of the other nodes. In *It Follows*, Hugh-Jay is the edge with the highest betweenness centrality, showing a strong connection between the initial perpetrator and the main victim. This suggests that connectivity in a network is related to the perpetrator’s ability to “set the stage” by building connections with others in a film—a control that clarifies the role of the perpetrator as a director of the performance of their victims.
Despite some inconclusive results about the role of audience, gender, and objects,  social network analysis helps illuminate the function of gothic isolation in *Halloween* through analysis of betweenness centrality, showing how themes of the female gothic influence social structure. Studying groupings of nodes in each network clarifies the relationship between role and theatricality, showing how a strongly-connected perpetrator signifies a director able to set the stage for the reign of their horror.


## Notes
 1. The social networks are based on five films: *It Follows*, *Get Out*, *Halloween*, *Scream*, and *The Shining*. The first step in creating the social networks was parsing the screenplays of each film. Screenplays were separated into scenes using “INT.” and “EXT.” as markers of scene breaks. Each time two characters are mentioned in a scene together, the weight of the connection between the two nodes in the resultant graph was incremented. This results in a visual representation of the relationships between a set of characters in each film, where nodes represent characters and edges are weighted based on the number of scenes characters are mentioned together in. In several graphs, I also included objects, added to the graph in the same way characters are. The final representation of the films is in as a gif showing the changes in the graph over the course of the narrative. Every frame represents the complete graph as each scene is added, visualizing a narrative through scene-by-scene interactions. 
 2. In these social networks, higher weighted edges indicate more connectivity, so I determined the inverse of each weight before determining betweenness. For example, given an edge with a weight of 3 (i.e. the characters attached to the edge appeared in 3 scenes together), a weight of 1/3 would be used in determining betweenness. This way, characters with a stronger connection are a better conduit, rather than being a longer edge.
 3. The characters with the highest betweenness centrality in It Follows, Get Out, Halloween, Scream, and The Shining are Jay, Chris, Loomis, Sidney, and Jack, while the edges with the highest betweenness centrality are Jay-Hugh, Chris-Rod, Laurie-Tommy, Sidney-Gale, and Danny-Jack.
 4. Although I included objects in some analysis, I was unable to draw definitive conclusions on their role relative to characters in the network: objects ranked low in betweenness centrality and their general role in the network was not distinct enough to draw significant conclusions. Separating the network into male and female sets was similarly indistinct, leaving questions about the broader role of gender in relationship to the social networks of horror films.